# A data-inflated host-virus association database

C'est quoi, `trefle`? It is a data product derived from the [`clover`][clover]
database of mammals-virus association. Specifically, `trefle` was produced using
LF-SVD imputation, a two-step algorithm where novel host-virus associations are
recommended based on truncated singular value decomposition applied to initial
values based on a linear filter.

[clover]: https://github.com/viralemergence/clover

## LF-SVD

Associations in `trefle` are recommended based on the output of a two-step
process. First [linear filtering][LF] is used to generate an initial value based
on network properties. The linear filter has four hyper-parameters (the four
weights assigned to the initial association, the connectance, and the in and out
degree of the nodes), constrained as their values must sum to one.

[LF]: https://www.nature.com/articles/srep45908

Second, we apply truncated SVD to the modified `clover` wherein the missing
association we impute get its initial value from to the linear filter. The rank
of truncation for the low-rank approximation is a fifth hyper-parameter in this
model.

In short, `trefle` is a giant LOOCV dataset. This has consequences for how much
computational resources are required to *produce* it, which we will approximate
as: hella. We will discuss the computational requirements more below.

## Hyper-parameters tuning

In practice, we can get away with removing the first hyper-parameter of the
linear filter, as we have reasons to suspect that negative associations can
often be false negatives. This leaves us with four hyper-parameters to tune.
## Output values

The output value in `trefle` is akin to an association probability (but it is
not a probability of association in the sense of [probabilistic ecological
networks][pen]). The final value after imputation is divided by the initial
value before imputation. If the association "score" does not change, this gives
a value of 1. We transform this by substracting one from the result, yielding an
*evidence* value for the association: positive evidence makes the association
more likely. To convert the evidence into a pseudo-probability, we put it
through the logistic function. This returns values in [0;1]. In practice, owing
to the numerical imprecisions involved in measuring the logistic on even
moderately large floating-point numbers on 64 bits, it is common to have final
pseudo-probability values of 1, and we rely on the *evidence* for ranking.

[pen]: https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/2041-210X.12468